>> Kyle Simpson: Let's dive into
deriving transduction, okay?
Again, strap on your seatbelts,
because I know that this is
gonna get a little complex.
To help ease the pain of what
we're about to talk about.
I wanna give you an anecdote from my
days in algebra back in like eighth or
ninth grade, and some of you may
relate to this particular story.
This used to drive me absolutely
nuts in my math classes because for
example, the teacher would be up at the
front of the room and she'd be teaching us
how to take some algebra equations.
On one side it's got like x squared minus
three and the square root of that, and
then on the other side
some other kind of thing.
And what we're trying to do
is like solve for x, okay?
And so we're like down each side.
We're doing different thing, s and
at some point you get to a point where
it's not at all obvious how you can
keep reducing either side of it.
It's like, well, this one has
a square root, and this is cubed, and
I don't know what mathematically I
can do with both of those things.
And then the teacher, she'll say,
well, what do we do next?
And everybody's like,
>> Kyle Simpson: Well, I don't know.
And then,
she gets this glimmer in her eye.
This is like 30 years ago and
I still feel like this is today.
She gets this glimmer in her eye and
she says, what if we multiply both sides
by 2x squared to the fourth, or whatever?
And you're like what?
It's completely out of thin air,
you just pulled something entirely
completely unrelated to this.
But sure enough when you multiply
both sides by this weird thing,
everything just fixes itself.
I don't know if anybody can relate
to this, but I see some nods,
some of you seem to have
had similar experiences.
This used to absolutely drive me insane.
Because I go up after class, I was that
annoying student I wanted to understand.
And I'd go up after class and
I pestered the teacher,
I'd say, how did you know about 2x
squared to the fourth, or whatever?
Like how did you know?
And the most annoying response was,
well, I've just done it before, right?
I knew it because I've done it before.
I had an intuition that maybe
it would work and it did.
Because the obvious point is,
well, if you had that intuition how am
I supposed to develop that intuition?
And the frustrating response is,
you just got to do it a bunch, right?
You just gotta do it and
screw up a bunch, and
then eventually you get to the point where
you've seen something like that before and
it occurs to you to try this,
out of the box thing and it works.
I share that anecdote with you,
because that's exactly what I'm about
to do slide after slide, after slide.
I'm about to pull stuff completely
out of thin air that would
completely never occurred to any of you.
It would never have occurred to me in
a million years to try these things.
But somehow the mathematicians tried
it and tried it, and tried it.
And it just makes it work.
I can't explain the math to you,
but I can tell you,
I can explain from a programming
perspective sort of what's going on, okay?
So when you feel like,
why would you try that?
That's exactly what I feel like.
Why did they try it?
I don't know.
Other than that it works, okay?
So let's start again from the beginning.
We have this map filter and reduce.
And we observed that clearly maps filters
don't compose with each other and
they definitely don't
compose with reducers.
As a matter of fact,
two reducers don't compose together.
Two high order reducers
to transistors do but
two reducers can't even compose together.
So these are clearly not
of the right shape and
we've gotta change some shapes
around to make this stuff work.
So how are we gonna do that?
Well, number one,
we want to observe that mapping and
filtering can fundamentally be
modeled as a reduction operation.
And I mentioned this
earlier in the course, but
now I'm gonna show you how we do it, okay?
So what we're first gonna do is take
the map and the filter parts, and
do them with reductions.
Lets look at the top.
I'm going to use my little
cursor here to help you,
cuz there's a lot of code on this slide.
So I'm gonna to help you
know what to focus on.
mapWithReduce, this utility here,
mapWithReduce is taking in an array and
a mapping function, okay?
And it's going to call array.reduce on it.
So all of a sudden you see we're
doing a mapping operation, but
we're doing it with a reducer, okay?
So what does that reduce are going to do?
Well, first to draw
your attention to here.
We're gonna start with an empty array is
the initial value for this reduction.
The general strategy for
using reduced to do a map or
a filter is, you make a new list and
then you stick stuff into it.
So our initial value starts
out as an empty list and
our reducer says I'm going
to push into that new list
that accumulator list every time, the
result of calling mapping function on V.
And then return that list.
So in other words our reduction is not
actually getting the new value every time,
it's just getting a growing and
growing array list.
Everybody follow me there?
The same technique is gonna be
true when we do the filter.
We are going to call arr.reduce,
line nine.
And we are gonna first call the predicate
function and if it returns true,
stick it in the list.
Otherwise, just don't do
anything with that value.
It's not like we need to throw it away,
we just don't put it in the new list and
then we just always keep
returning that list every time.
So both of those have the same strategy,
which is start out with an empty array,
go through the original array, and decide
what values to stick into the new array.
That's how we do map and
filter operations with a reduce.
Okay, so let's take a deep breath.
Did I lose anyone at that point?
Did that make sense to you how we can
do both maps and filters with a reduce?
I wanna call something out.
We're gonna come back to this, but
I wanna call something out just so
that you're trying to develop this
instinct as a functional programmer here.
What am I doing on line three?
>> Speaker 2: Mutating an array
>> Kyle Simpson: I am
mutating an array that was passed in.
Does that smell like
a side effect to anyone?
It absolutely is a side effect.
So you might think to yourself,
maybe the better way of doing this
instead of mutating the array would
have been to create a brand new array
that has the value appended onto it.
And that generally would
be absolutely how you would
want to do a map with a reduce, okay?
But I'm specifically cutting a corner
here, which is gonna turn out to
in the math, it's gonna wash out, it's
gonna factor out, it's not gonna matter.
But I just want you to get that intuition
of looking for side effects and
avoiding them.
The only reason we're using this here is
because the whole point of transduction is
a performance optimization.
We're deliberately in the math allowing
ourselves to cheat just a little bit and
in the end, the solution works out, okay?
But don't in a general sense,
just ignore those sorts of side effects
they are important to pay attention to.
Okay, so we have map with reduce and
we have filter with reduce.
What's happening down on the bottom is
that we are calling first mapWithReduce.
Now we're calling them as standalone
utilities instead of chained
methods, right?
We're passing list with the mapper add1.
And then we're passing that new list,
that mapped list into filterWithReduce
using the isOdd predicate.
And that new list is the thing that
we then reduce with our sum reducer.
And result still ends up at 42.
Okay, so we have a mapWithReduce and
a filterWithReduce, but
it would be easier for us to get
those reducers to be shaped together
to compose if we extracted the reducer
out of these utilities, right?
These utilities are standalone,
they do the reduction for us.
But what if we just have these utilities
give us the reducer that we could use.
So we're gonna make these utilities
instead of do the list thing.
We're gonna make these
utilities return us a reducer.
And then we'll do the reduction ourselves.
Follow me?
So let's do that.
Let's change the mapWithReduce and
the filterWithReduce to instead of doing
the reductions to just produce the reducer
for us, and we'll do the rest.
Here's what that looks like.
I now have a utility called mapReducer,
which only takes a mapping function.
It doesn't need to concern itself
with the list at this point.
It's just gonna take the mapping function.
And it's gonna make me a reducer
that could reduce any list
with that mapping function.
That's what happening up
on lines two through five,
is it's making a reducer that's hard
coded into use that mapping function.
See a mapping function
there on line three?
Back up, see a mapping
function there on line three?
It's hard coded into this
reducer via closure, okay?
The same thing is happening lines eight
through 13, we are going to pass in
a predicate function and create a reducer
that is hard coded to use that predicate
function in it's test of whether it
should push something into a list or not.
Everybody with me here?
So down at the bottom,
what we're doing now is we have
three separate reduce calls.
We create one reducer line
18 by passing in our mapper.
We create another reducer
line 19 by passing in isOdd.
And then, we already have
the sum reducer ready to go.
So that's how we end up creating
the chain of three reductions.
We still haven't put the reducers
together, but can everybody agree?
Now that we've got three reducers, we've
made some significant progress because
those things definitely are shaped
more similarly together, or
at least on the track towards being
able to compose them together.
Are you with me?
Any questions about that step of the
derivation, extracting out our reducers?
>> Kyle Simpson: Yes?
>> Speaker 3: So
reduce is like the adapter, right?
Can you say that, I mean.
>> Kyle Simpson: I'm not
sure what you mean by that.
>> Speaker 3: That it's the one that's
gonna bring the other functions
together, right?
>> Kyle Simpson: Not exactly.
So what's gonna bring,
reduce is sort of the interface.
>> Speaker 3: That's, I mean-
>> Kyle Simpson: It's not the adapter,
it's the interface.
We're saying, the shape of a reducer
is the thing that is mathematically
capable of being composed together
with any other reducer but
actually it's higher order
reduces that composed together.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay, so
reduce kind of just this interface that
we know through the math we know is gonna
work out for us.